the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
coreware at
ocw.mit.edu
so last time we
saw things about gradients and
directional derivatives before that
we've studied how to look for Minima and
Maxima functions of several
variables and today we're going to look
again at minmax problems but in a
different setting namely when the
variables are not
independent and so what we'll see is the
method of lrange multipliers and this is
the one point in the term when I can
shine with my French accent and say l
name properly
okay so what are lrange multipliers
about well the
goal is to minimize or
maximize a
function of several variables let's say
for example F of
XYZ three variables but where these
variables are no longer
independent
so they're not independent that means
that there's a relation between them the
relation is maybe some equation of the
form G of XYZ equals some
constant okay so you take the relation
between XYZ you call that G and that
gives you the constraint and the goal is
to minimize F only of those values of
XYZ that satisfy the constraint so
what's one way to do that well one way
to do that if the constraint is very
simple we can maybe solve for one of the
variables okay maybe we can solve this
equation for one of the variables plug
back into F and then we have a usual min
max problem that we've seen how to do
the problem is sometimes you can't
actually solve for XYZ in here because
this condition is too complicated and
then we need a new method and that's
what we are going to do
okay so why would we care about that
well one example is actually in physics
maybe you've seen in
thermodynamics that you study quantities
about gases and there quantities that
involve pressure volume and
temperature and pressure volume and
temperature are not independent of each
other I mean you know probably the
equation PV equals nrt and of course
there you could actually solve to
express things in terms of one or the
other but sometimes it's more convenient
to really keep all three variables but
treat them as constraint so that's just
an example of a situation where you
might want to do
this anyway we'll look mostly at
mathematical examples but just to point
out that this is useful when you study
guesses in
physics so
the first observation is we can't use
our usual method of looking for critical
points of f because critical points of f
typically they will not satisfy this
condition so they won't be good
Solutions we need something else okay so
well let's look at an example and we'll
see how that leads us to the
method okay so for example let's say
that I want to find the point closest to
the origin on
on the
hyperbola XY = 3 in the plane okay
so that means I have this hyperbola and
I'm asking myself what's the point on it
that's the closest to the origin I mean
we can solve by Elementary geometry we
don't need actually lrange multipliers
but we going to do it with lrange
multipliers because it's a pretty good
example so what does it mean well it
means really we want to
minimize distance to the origin so
what's the distance to the origin if I
have a point at coordinates X
Y then the distance to the origin is
square root of x² + y s
well do we really want to minimize that
or can we minimize something
easier yeah maybe we can minimize the
square of the distance okay so let's
forget this guy and
instead so actually we'll
minimize F of XY = X2 + y^2 that looks
better subject to the
constraint XY = 3 and so we'll call this
thing G of
XY okay to illustrate the general
method
so let's look at a
picture
so here you can see in yellow the
hyperbola x y equal three and we're
going to look for the points that are
closest to the
origin so what can we do well for
example we can plot the function x² + y^
2 function
f that's the Contour plot of f with a
hyperbola on top of it and now let's see
what we can do with that well let's ask
ourselves for
example if I look at points that
where fals 20 now I think I'm at 20 but
you can't really see it um that's a
circle that's the point was distance
square is 20 well can I find a solution
if I'm on the hyperbola yes there are
four points at this distance okay can I
do better well let's decrease the
distance yes we can still find points on
the hyperbola and so on well except if
we go too low then there's no points on
this circle anymore on the hyperbola so
if we decrease the value of f that we
want to look at there's somehow a limit
value Beyond which we can't go and
that's the minimum of f okay so we're
trying to look for the smallest value of
F that will actually be realized on the
hyperbola so when does that happen well
I have to backtrack a little bit it
seems like the limiting case is
basically here it's when the circle is
tangent to the hyperbola that's the
smallest Circle
that will hit the
hyperbola okay so if I take a larger
value of F I will have Solutions if I
take a smaller value of F I will not
have any solutions anymore so that's the
situation that we want to solve
for okay
so how do we find that
minimum well the key
observation that's valid on this picture
and that actually will remain true in
the completely General case case is that
when we're at the minimum the level
curve the level curve of f is actually
tangent to our hyperbola it's tangent to
our
constraint um I mean to the set of
points where X yal 3 to the
hyperbola okay so let's write that down
observe we observe that at the
minimum
the level
curve of
f is
tangent to the
hyperbola and remember the hyperbola is
given by the equation g equals 3 so it's
a level curve of
G okay so we have a level curve of F and
a level curve of G that are tangent to
each other
and I claim that's going to be the
general situation that we're interested
in so how do we look for you know try to
solve for points where this
happens so how do we find X Y we have
LEL of f and g are
tangent to each
other
well so let's think for a
second if the two level curves are
tangent to each other that means that
they have the same tangent line right if
they have the same tangent line that
means that the normal vectors should be
parallel
okay let me maybe draw a picture here so
this is the level curve maybe f equals
something and this is the level curve g
equals constant here my constant is
three well if I look at the gradient
vectors so the gradient of f will be
perpendicular to the level curve of f
the gradient of G will be perpendicular
to the level curve of G they don't have
any reason to be the same size okay but
they have to be parallel to each other
of course they could also be parallel
pointing in opposite
directions but the key point is
that when this
happens the gradient of f is parallel to
the gradient of
G well let's check
that
okay so here's a point and I can plot
the gradient of f in blue the gradient
of G in yellow and you see in most of
these places somehow the two gradients
are not really parallel actually I
shouldn't be looking at random points I
should be looking only on the hyperbola
right I want points on the hyperbola
where the two gradients are parallel
well when does that happen hm looks like
it will happen
here
okay so see when I'm at the minimum the
two gradient vectors are parallel okay
that's it's not really a proof it's an
example but seems to be convincing so
far things work pretty
well okay so how do we decide if two
vectors are parallel well they're
parallel when they're proportional to
each
other
so you can write one of them as a
constant times the other one and that
constant usually when uses the Greek
letter Lambda okay I don't know if
you've seen it before it's the Greek
letter for
L and uh
probably I'm sure that somebody
somebody's idea of paying a tribute to
lrange you know by putting an L in there
um okay so Lambda is just a constant and
we're looking for a scalar Lambda and
points X and Y where this holds so in
fact what we're doing is we're
replacing uh min max problem in two
variables with a constraint between them
by a set of equations involving you will
see three variables
so we had minmax with two
variables X and Y but not
independent um we had a constraint
G of XY equals
constant and that
becomes something new that becomes a
system of
equations where we have to solve
well so let's write down what it means
for gradient F to be proportional to
gradient G that means that F subx should
be Lambda * G subx and F suby should be
Lambda time G sub y right because the
gradient vectors here are f subx f sub Y
and G subx G sub y if you have a third
variable Z then you have also an
equation f subz equals Lambda G
subz now let's see how many unknowns do
we have in this equations well there's X
there's Y and there's Lambda so we have
three
unknowns we have only two equations
something's
missing well yeah I mean X and Y are not
actually independent they're related by
the equation G of XY equal C
so we need to add the
constraint gal C and now we have three
equations involving three
variables okay let's see how that works
so here remember we have F = X2 + y^2
and G =
XY okay so what's F subx that's going to
be 2x equals Lambda time what is g
subx
y okay so maybe I should write here F
subx equal Lambda G sub X just to remind
you then we
have F sub y equals Lambda G sub y why
does that what so F sub y is 2 y equal
Lambda * G sub y is
X and then our third equation g = c
becomes XY =
3 okay so that's what we would have to
solve okay any questions at this point
no
yes ah uh how do I know the direction of
the gradient do you mean how do I know
that it's perpendicular to the level
curve oh how do I know whether it points
uh yeah in that direction the opposite
one well that depends I mean we've seen
actually last time that the gradient is
perpendicular to the level and points
towards higher values of a function so
it could be uh wait where did I have
them yeah it could be that my gradient
vectors up there actually point in
opposite directions it doesn't matter to
me because it will still look the same
in terms of the equation just Lambda
will be positive or negative depending
on the case okay so I can handle both
situations it's not a
problem so yeah I can allow Lambda to be
posi or
negative and well in this example it
looks like Lambda will be positive if
you look at the picture on the on the
plot
yes
two well because actually they're not
equal to each other if you look at you
know so if you look at this point where
the hyperbola and the circle touch each
other so first of all I don't know which
Circle I'm going to look at right I'm
trying to solve actually for the radius
of the circle I'm trying to find what's
the minimum value of
f um and second at that value of f
actually the value at that point the
value of F and the value of G are not
equal right G is equal to three because
I'm on the hyperbola x yals 3 the value
of f will be the square of the distance
whatever that
is I think it will end up being six but
we'll
see okay um so you can't really set them
equal because you don't know what f is
equal to in advance
yes
Max uh not quite no we are not so I mean
actually here I'm just using this idea
of you know finding a point closest to
the origin to illustrate an example of a
minmax problem the general problem we're
trying to solve is minimize f F subject
to g equals constant and what we're
going to do for that is we're really
going to say instead let's look at
places where gradient F and gradient G
are parallel to each other and solve for
equations of that I think we completely
lose the notion of closest point if we
you know just look at these equations we
don't really say anything about closest
points anymore of course that's what
they mean in the end uh but in the
general setting there's no closest point
involved anymore so that
okay
yes yes so it's always going to be the
case that at the minimum or at the
maximum of a function subject to a
constraint the level curves of F and the
level curves of G will be tangent to
each other so that's the basis for this
method okay so I'm going to justify that
soon minimum or yes it could be minimum
or maximum
or in three dimensions it could even be
a SLE point and in fact I should say in
advance this method will not tell us
whether it's a minimum or a maximum we
don't have any way of knowing except for
testing values we can't use second
derivative test or anything like that
okay I'll get back to
that uh yes why set y ah yes here you
can set y equal to 3x and then you can
minimize X2 + 9 / x^2 uh in general you
know if I'm trying to solve a more
complicated problem I might not be able
to solve okay so I'm doing an example
where indeed here you could solve and
remove one variable uh but you can't
always do that and this method will
still work the other one
won't
okay um I don't see any other questions
are there any other
questions okay then I see a lot of you
suddenly stretching and so on so it's
very confusing for me
but
okay so how do we solve these equations
well the answer is in general we might
be in deep
trouble okay there's no General method
for solving the equations that you get
from this method you just have to think
about them and so you know sometimes it
will be very
easy sometimes it will be so hard that
you can't actually do it without a
computer compter sometimes it will be
just hard enough to be on Part B of this
week's problem
set
um
okay so in this case I claim in this
case we can actually do it without so
much trouble okay because
actually we can think of
this as a 2X two linear system in X and
Y well let let me let me do
something okay so let me rewrite the
first two equations as 2x - Lambda y = 0
and Lambda x - 2 y equals
z okay and XY equal 3
right that's what we want to solve well
I can put this into Matrix
form 2 - Lambda Lambda - 2 *
XY equals
z Now how do I solve a linear system
Matrix * XY equal Z well I always have
an obvious solution okay X and Y both
equal to Zer is that a good solution
no because 0 * 0 is not
free okay so we want another
solution so the trivial
solution 0 0 does
not solve the constraint equation x yal
3 so we want another solution when do we
have another
solution well when the determinant of
the Matrix is zero
okay so we have other
Solutions
exist only
if the
determinant of a matrix is zero and
where m is this
G okay so let's compute the
determinant
well that seems to be -4 + Lambda
s so that's zero exactly when Lambda
Square equal 4 which is Lambda is plus
or minus
okay so already you see here it's at a
level of difficulty that's a little bit
much for an exam but perfectly fine for
a problem set or for a beautiful lecture
like this one okay
so how do we deal with well we have two
cases to look at Lambda equal 2 or
Lambda minus
2 let's start with Lambda equal 2 if I
set Lambda equal 2 what does that what
does this equation become well it
becomes xal y this one becomes yal
X well they seem to be the same okay xal
Y and then the equation x y = 3
becomes well x² =
3 so I have two
solutions one is X = root3 and therefore
yal root3 as
well
or root3
root3
okay let's look at the other case well
if I set Lambda equal to -2 then I get
2x = -2 y that means X
=
Y the second
one 2 Y = -2x that's y = x well that's
the same thing and x y = 3 becomes well
x^2 =
3 can we solve that no okay so there's
no Solutions
here so now we have two candidate points
which are these two points root three
root three or negative root3 negative
root3 okay
so let's actually look at what we have
here well maybe you can't create the
coordinates but actually the point that
I have here is indeed root three root
three and how do we see that Lambda
equals two well if you look at this
picture the gradient of f that's the
blue Vector is indeed twice the yellow
Vector gradient G okay that's where you
read the value of
Lambda and we have the other
solution which is somewhere
here root3 root3 and there again Lambda
equals 2 the two vectors are
proportional by a factor of
two uh
yes
no Solutions are not quite guaranteed to
be absolute Minima or Maxima they're
guaranteed to be somehow critical points
under the constraint that means you know
if you were able to solve and eliminate
a variable they would be critical points
so then you have the same problem as
with critical points are they Maxima or
Minima and the answer is well we won't
know until we
check okay
um more
questions
no yes what is a multier so what is a l
multiplier well it's this number Lambda
is called the multiplier here okay it's
multiplier because it's what you have to
multiply gradient of G by to get
gradient of
f you know it
multiplies okay
so okay so let's try to
see why is this
method valid because you know so
far I've shown you pictures and I've
said well see they're tangent but why is
it that they have to be tangent in
general okay so let's think about it
let's say that we are at a
constraint Min or
Max so what that means is that if I move
on the level g equals constant then the
value of f should only increase or only
decrease but it means in particular to
first order it will not change okay
that's the you know that's so at an
unconstrained Min or Max the partial
derivatives are zero in this case the
derivatives are zero only in the allowed
directions and the allowed directions
are those that stay on the on the level
surface g equals
constant okay
so
in any
direction
along the level set gals
C the
rate of change of
f must be
zero okay that's what happens at Minima
or Maxima except here of course we look
only at the allowed
directions okay so let's say the same
thing in terms of directional
derivatives
[Music]
so that
means
for
any
Direction that's
tangent to the constraint level gal
C we must
have DF DS in the direction of U equals
z okay let me maybe draw a picture
so let's say now I'm in three variables
just to you know give you
different examples so here I have a
level surface gal C I'm at my point and
if I move in any
direction that on the level surface so I
move in the direction U that tangent to
the level surface then the rate of
change of f in that direction should be
zero
okay now remember what's the formula for
this guy well we've seen that this guy
is actually gradient F dot
U so that means any such Vector U must
be perpendicular to the gradient of
f
well so that means that the gradient of
f should be perpendicular to anything
that's tangent to this level so that
means the gradient of f should be
perpendicular to the level set that's
what we've
shown
but we know another Vector that's also
perpendicular to the level set of G that
the gradient of
G so we conclude clude that the gradient
of f must be par to the gradient of G
because both are perpendicular to the
level set of
G okay I see confused faces so let me
try to tell you again where that comes
from so we say if we have a constraint
minimum or maximum if we move in the
level set of g f doesn't change well
doesn't change to first order remember
it's the same idea as when you're
looking for a minimum you set the
derivative equal to zero okay so the
Dera in any direction tangent to gal C
should be the directional derivative of
f in any such direction should be
zero that's what we mean by uh critical
point of
F and so that means that any Vector u u
had any unit Vector tangent to the level
set of G is going to be perpendicular to
the gradient of f so so that means that
the gradient of f is perpendicular to
the level set of
G if you want that means the level sets
of f and g are tangent to each other
okay so that's justifying what we've
observed on the picture but the two
level sets have to be tangent to each
other at the constraint minimum or
maximum does that make a little bit of
sense kind of I see at least a few faces
noing so I take that
for I take that to be a positive
answer okay
so since I've been asked by several of
you how do I know if it's a maximum or a
minimum well warning the
method doesn't
tell whether a
solution
is a
minimum or a
maximum okay so how do we do it well
more bad
news we can't use the second derivative
[Applause]
test and the reason for that is that we
care actually only about these specific
directions that are tangent to the level
of G and we don't really I mean we we
don't want to bother to try to Define
directional second derivatives not to
mention that actually it wouldn't work
uh there is a Criterion but it's much
more complicated than that so basically
the answer for us is we don't have a
second derivative test in this
situation so what are we left with well
we're just left with comparing values
you know say that in this problem you
found a point where fals 3 a point where
fals 9 a point where fals 15 well then
probably the minimum is the point where
fals 3 and the maximum is 15 actually in
this case what we found Minima you know
uh these two points are tied for minimum
what about the maximum what's the
maximum of f on the
hyperbola well it's Infinity because the
you know the point can go as far as you
want from the origin
so but the general idea is if we have a
good reason to believe that there should
be a minimum and you know that it's not
like at infinity or something weird like
that then the minimum will be a solution
of the lrange multiplier equations so we
just look for all the solutions and then
we choose the one that gives us the
lowest
value is that good
enough okay so let me actually write
that down just
just
so to find the
minimum or the maximum
We
compare the values of
F at the various
solutions to multiplier equations to
equations
okay
okay let's
do well sorry I should say also
sometimes you can just conclude you know
by thinking geometrically I mean in this
case you know when it's asking you which
point is closest to the origin you can
just see that your answer is the correct
one okay let's
do an advanced example
okay Advanced means
that well this one I didn't actually
dare to put on Part B of a problem
set so instead I'm going to do it okay
so what is this going to be about we're
going to look for a surface minimizing
pyramid okay so let's say that we want
to
build uh
pyramid with a given triangular
base
and a given
volume and so say that you know I have
maybe in the XY plane I'm giving you
some
triangle and I'm going to try to build a
pyramid so I have to find where to put
course I can choose where to put the top
of a
pyramid because this guy will end up
being behind
now um and the constraint I mean the
goal is to
minimize the total surface
area Okay
so first time I told this class that was
like a few years ago it was just before
they built the STA Center and then I
used to motivate this problem by saying
well Frank G has gone crazy and he's
given a triangular plot of land he wants
to put a pyramid that needs to be the
right amount of volume so that you can
put all the offices in there and he
wants it to be actually you know covered
in solid gold and because that's
expensive the MIT Administration wants
him to cut the costs a bit and so you
have to minimize the total sides so that
it doesn't cost too
much we'll see if MIT comes up with a
triangular pyramid building uh hopefully
not could be your next D you never
know okay anyway
it's
you
know it's a fine geometry problem and
let's try to think about you know how we
can do
this so the natural way to think about
it would be well what we have to look
for first what do we have to look for we
have to look for the position of that
top
Point well remember we know that the
volume of a
pyramid is 1/3 of area of a base
time
height okay
so in fact fixing the volume knowing
that we have fixed the area of the base
means that we're fixing the height of
the
pyramid okay so the height is completely
fixed what we have to choose just is
where do we put that top point do we put
it smack in the middle of a triangle or
to a side or even you know anywhere we
want but
its Z coordinate is
fixed okay let's
call H the
height
so what we could
do is something like this we say well we
have three points in the base let's call
them P1 at X1 y1 1 0 P2 at X2 Y2 0 P3 at
X3 Y3
Z this point p is the unknown point at X
YH well at least we know the
height and then we want to minimize the
sum of the areas of these three
triangles that are you know one here one
here and one at the back and areas of
triangles we know how to express using
lengths of cross length of cross product
so that becomes a function of X and Y
and you can try to minimize it and
actually it doesn't quite work the
formulas are just too complicated you
never get
there
so what happens is actually maybe we
need better
coordinates why do we need better
coordinates that's because the geometry
is kind of difficult to do if you use XY
coordinates I mean formula for cross
product is fine but then the length of a
vector will be
annoying and just doesn't look good
so instead let's think about it
differently oh I have one more
board okay so I claim if we do it this
way
you know and we express when the area as
a function of X Y well actually we can
solve the minimum for the minimum so
here's another way to do
it well what's worked pretty well for us
so far is this geometric idea of you
know base times
height so let's think in terms of the
heights of the side triangles
okay so I'm going to use the heights of
these
things and I'm going to say that the
area will be the sum of three terms
which are three bases three Heights so
let's give names to these
quantities
so actually for that it's going to be
good to have
the point in the XY plane that lives
directly below P let's call
Q so p is the point at coordinates x y
and
H and let's call Q the point that's just
below it so coordinates X
y0
okay
so let's
see let me draw a picture actually let
me draw a map you know of this thing
seen from above so you have P1
P2
P3 I have my point Q in the
middle so let's see to know these areas
I need to know the base well the base I
can decide that I know it because it's
part of my given data right I know the
sides of this triangle let me call the
length A2 A1 A2
A3 I also need to know the height so I
need to know these lengths how do I know
these lengths well it's a distance in
space that's a little bit annoying but
maybe I can reduce it to a distance in
the plane by looking Instead at this
distance
here okay so let me give names to the
distances from Q to the
sides okay so let's
call you 1 U2 and u3 the
distances from Q to the
sides
well now I claim I can find actually
sorry I need to draw one more thing I
claim I have a nice formula for the area
because this side here so this is
vertical and that's horizontal so this
length here is u3 this length here is H
so what's this length
here yeah it's square root
of u3 squ
oops plus h s and similarly for these
other guys they're square roots of a u
square plus h squ Okay
so
the
heights of the
faces are square root of U1 s+ h s and
similarly with U2 and u3 so the side the
total side area is going to be well area
of the first face is 1 12 of base time
height plus 12
of over base time over
height
plus 12 of third
one it doesn't look so much better but
trust me it will get
better okay so now that's a
function of three variables U1 U2
u3 and how do we relate U1 U2 u3 to each
other they're probably not
independent well let's cut this triangle
here into three pieces like that
oops
then each
piece has side well let's look at say
the piece at the bottom it has Bas A3
height
u3 so cut the base into three tells you
that the area of a
base is
12 of A1 U1 plus 12 of A2 U2 plus 12 of
A3 u3 and that's our
constraint okay so my three variables U1
U2 u3 are constrained in this way the
sum of these three guys must be the area
of the base I want to minimize that guy
so that's my
G okay and that guy here is my f so now
if I write the L multiplier equations
well partial F of partial
U1 is well if you do the calculation you
will see it's 12 A1 U1 over < TK of U1 s
+ h s should be Lambda times what's
partial G partial U1 that one you can do
sure it's 12 A1 oh these guys
simplify okay if you do the same
with a second
one things simplify again and same with
the third
one uh well you will get after
simplifying u3 otk of u3 + h² equal
Lambda so now that means this guy this
guy equals this guy they're all equal to
Lambda and if you think about it that
means that U1 equals U2 equals
u3 see it look like scary equations but
the solution is very
simple so what does it mean it means
that our Point Q should be equidistant
from all three sides that's called the
in Center so Q should be the in Center
so the next time that you have to build
a golden pyramid and don't want to go
broke well you know where to put the
top okay if that was a bit fast sorry uh
anyway it's not completely crucial but
you know go over it you will see it
works have a nice
weekend